 WHAT IS VISUAL LITERACY ? AND DO I HAVE IT ? From the earliest days of our education , we are taught literacy skills . Most fundamentally , we are taught to read and write . As we get older , we ' re also taught literacies like computer literacy , information litera cy , and financial literacy . Being literate in something means to be knowledgeable and competent , to know the fundamentals first and foremost . But as we learn more complex topics , vocabularies , and processes , we are said to be " more " literate in something . Two interesting anecdotes are important to consider when we talk about what it means to be visually literate . Chemist Roald Hoffman , in his book The Same and Not the Same , stated that his ability ( and he implies other scientists ' ability in this statement as well ) to " draw a face so that it looks like a face atrophied at age ten " ( 69 ) . Pause and reflect on that for a moment . Can you ( or most people you know ) draw any better than a ten - year - old ? Why do you think that is ? The other anecdote comes from popular author Daniel Pink , who recounts a time when he visited elementary schools and asked young kids if they were artists . In kindergarten , without fail , when asked who every child would consistently raise their hands . But as children got older , the number of self - proclaimed artists would slowly drop ; by sixth grade , only one or two students would raise their hands . If this anecdote is any reflection on our culture , it suggests students are either too removed from artistic devel opment in school by twelve years old , or they are too embarrassed to admit that they like art . Either way , the result is the same : most people , after elementary school , don ' t develop literacy skills in visual communication and design . If we put this into perspective , it means that , despite living in a visually saturated world - where it has been said that we view between 3 , 000 and 20 , 000 visual messages per day - most grown adults don ' t know which colors affect which emotions , how lines affect interpretation of statistics , what visual cues make them feel like a product is expensive , or what is most likely to grab their attention on a billboard . In other words , unless someone has a degree in art or design , they are often less likely to be aware of how to persuade others and , even more scary , they are often unaware of how they are being persuaded .